+++
title = 'MCBE RSG Strats and Meta for 1.16'
summary = 'Strategies for running 1.16 Random Seed Glitchless'
tags = ["practice", "strat"]
+++

[The article has been written by Danny15](https://www.speedrun.com/users/Danny15).

Introduction
------------

MCBE Speedrunning is vastly different to that of Java Edition and very
few people other than the runners themselves actually know how it works.
In this document, I will be explaining the major strats and the "metas"
that we have. First, I will explain the three major metas in short,
before I dive deeply into them. Secondly, I will explain how
[MCBE Structure generation](#bedrock-generation-differences-from-java)
works. Lastly I will explain the [strats](#strats-and-routes) such as
one cycling and bastion routing.

### Meta #1 "Classic/Warped"

The first meta is entering quickly and getting a fortress and a wastes
or a warped to exit the nether at a decent pace. These runs are
typically the slowest meta but are the least reset heavy. Classic is
much more common than warped.

Example Runs:

- Classic:
  [RSG Speedrun in 14:54](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YoyQdhiTx6k)
- Warped:
  [Minecraft Bedrock RSG in 12:46](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FJdxxcaEkm4)
  - due to the lack of warped runs, this run is played like Meta #3,
    using the stronghold, but the nether is an example of a warped run.
    This nether split could have definitely been done on the Classic
    Example Run.

### Meta #2 "Bastion"

The second meta is to enter quickly, locate a bastion, route it, and
pearl to a fortress and then blind at good blind coordinates or use the
home portal to perform educated travel. This is the least used meta as
it is relatively reset heavy and is not much more rewarding than the
first meta. However, occasionally, you might spawn into the nether where
you see both a fortress and a bastion immediately, and this can be
extremely fast.

Example Run:

- [12:59 RSG (no sh spawn pb)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G0jnzdNDOH0)

### Meta #3 "Stronghold"

The third meta is to reset for good coordinates and find a village.
Villages at least 32 chunks from 0,0 have a chance of having a
stronghold beneath them. This is the most reset heavy meta but very
rewarding. It, along with meta #1, is commonly used, especially among
players playing for world record.

Example Run:

- [9:30 RSG WR (7:16 enter end)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bWRj-WYUqkM&t=14s)

### Meta #1 (in depth)

Typically runners playing this meta will reset for an enter (lava pool,
deep ravine, or ruined portal) or a blacksmith; however, some will reset
for just a village and dig off the village.

Village routing on bedrock is _similar_ to java, except we need more
food (hunger runs out very fast on bedrock), the iron golem kill is
faster, we only need 3 beds, and we only need 3 iron from the golem
(because of wood lighting). Once a player has finished the village
routing (a good village routing time is about 1:15), he will either use
the enter he reset for (lava) or dig down for lava (if he didn't reset
for an enter).

If he just resets for an enter and does not have a village, this
overworld is played almost identically to java with the exception that
the player will not acquire flint (because of
[wood lighting](#wood-light)). This however is usually slow and results
in lots of runs lost to food. You need much more food in Bedrock runs.

Because of the
[village grid](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/13HScCcuMsga9hCMtYHMB3pQV-INp4V9VPE8PuQfz014/edit#gid=0)
and spawning at z4-z32 in every run, finding villages is very common on
bedrock. A runner usually just needs to look a positive z direction and
into the closest village grid from spawn and very often he will get a
village. Approximately 20% of seeds have a village visible from spawn
(on sixteen render distance).

Once the player enters the nether, he can play for Meta #1 or Meta #2 at
this point - if he gets a fort at spawn, usually meta 1 is played;
however, if he gets a bastion, usually the player will switch to meta 2.
It should be noted that nether structures are about twice as rare as
they are on java.

Since bedrock does not have the f3 screen, the only thing to aid bedrock
players in finding structures is the nether quadrants (which are just
like java except about 50% larger). Typically, the best way to find a
quick structure is in the positive positive quadrant (since you almost
always enter in this quadrant and structures don't need to wait eighty
blocks before generating).

For Meta #1, after getting six or seven rods (most good runners leave on
6 since finding the stronghold village only requires one or two eyes),
the player will either play for classic trades or kill endermen in a
warped forest. The classic trading on bedrock works very similar to how
java does, with the exception of [fast barter](#piglins-and-bastions).
The warped forest strat however is quite a bit different than how
players on java would play it (although this really isn't or wasn't used
on java at all). When java players are forced to kill endermen in a
warped forest, they typically will lure them into boats and crit them
with their axe. On bedrock, typically players will either tower up or
put a roof over their head, preventing endermen from getting to them,
and swinging their sword at every endermen repeatedly until the player
has enough pearls.

Once the pearls and rods have been acquired, the player will leave the
nether through his enter portal, and travel to the stronghold. A player
will usually just throw one eye and continue in the exact direction
until they find a village. Since there is no f3 screen, there is no
distance estimation or more complicated method of locating the
stronghold. Once they find the stronghold village (most, although not
all of the closest strongholds generate under villages) they dig down
using a strat which will guarantee they dig down at the correct 4,4 for
the starting staircase. Once in the stronghold, the player will navigate
it before entering the end.

### Meta #2 (in depth)

Meta #2 is basically the java meta with the exception of the overworld
usually being different. In addition, home portal educated is much more
common on Bedrock. Because of the village grid, it is not hard at all to
hit the majority of educated travel second portals within a couple
hundred blocks of the stronghold village. The player starts off with a
similar overworld to meta #1; however, an iron pickaxe is of course more
important to get in the overworld than Meta #1. Since the player
generally doesn't know whether he's playing Meta #1 or Meta #2 until he
finds his first nether structure, the iron pickaxe isn't forced, but if
he enters through a cave, he will usually grab iron ore and enough
cobblestone to make a furnace in the nether. Just like Java, you can
roll the iron in the bastion chests, but these often slow down bastion
routes, especially bridge. Once all pearls are obtained from one of the
bastion routes, the player will pearl to a neighboring quadrant and look
for a fortress. With bedrock quadrants being 480x480, the player should
look a little deeper into the quadrant than java.

After the rods are acquired, the player will pearl to good blind travel
coordinates, just blind travel randomly from the fortress, or pearl back
to the original portal for educated travel. Once the player exits his
second portal, he will finish off like Meta #1.

### Meta #3 (in depth)

Meta #3 is by far the most popular amongst top runners. For Meta #3,
players will reset for good coordinates because of the unique bedrock
[spawn relocation](#spawn-relocation). Once a player gets good
coordinates (usually players reset for something like 600-1800), he will
look for a village, optimally around 868-1139x or 1300-1571x (these 2
[village grids](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/13HScCcuMsga9hCMtYHMB3pQV-INp4V9VPE8PuQfz014/edit#gid=0)
groups [those are the x coordinates, the z coordinates have multiple
village grids with those x coordinates] have about a ⅙ and ⅛ chance of
generating a stronghold underneath respectively); however, other
villages grids may be used, although strongholds are rarer in those.
After the player finds the village, he will route it like normal and
after he will use
[SprinkzStrat](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q2iouMnEiMI) or memorized
4,4 coordinates to dig directly into the starting staircase. If the
player rolls a stronghold, he will navigate it and enter the nether
through a portal in the end portal room. This meta is extremely good as
there have been countless sub3 enters through the stronghold portal
room, and even a couple sub2 enters through the portal room; however, it
is a bit more reset heavy compared to other popular metas. For the
nether, the player will either use bastion, classic, or warped to obtain
pearls and will obviously return through the portal back to the
stronghold before entering the end.

Bedrock Generation Differences from Java
----------------------------------------

MCBE generation is by far the main reason speedrunning is so different
between the two editions. The main POIs which generate differently are
fortresses, bastions, ruined portals, ravines, lava pools, villages,
shipwrecks, and strongholds.

### Caves

On bedrock, caves generally extend much farther than they do on java and
are part of large cave systems. A large amount of surface caves extend
all the way to y11 so it's very viable to just run down a cave if you
are playing meta 1 or 2.

### Fortresses

There are two main things to note when comparing bedrock fortresses to
those on java:

- Quadrants are about 50% larger, therefore, making fortresses harder to
  locate.
- There is a small chance (approximately 1/15) that the blaze spawner
  block is missing. The reason of this is unknown, but it seems to be
  more common in basalt deltas than any other biome.

### Bastions

Bastions are rarer because the quadrant sizes are much larger. The
routes are largely changed. Bridge, Housing, Stables, and Triple Chest
Stables are faster than Java. Upper treasure is slower, and bottom
treasure is about the same as Java. Armor is generally more important in
routes (except bridge). The routes can be found down below in the
[Strats section](#strats-and-routes).

### Ruined portals

Per block of obsidian, there is a 20% chance it is replaced by crying
obsidian - on Java, this is reduced to 15%. This doesn't sound like a
large difference but actually makes most portals about twice as likely
to not be enterable from about 5% to about 2.7%. However, an upside to
ruined portals on Bedrock is that terrain cannot prevent the chest from
generating. The only scenario where a chest is found to be missing is
when another structure overrides it.

### Villages

The way villages (and strongholds) generate is one of the single largest
changes between MCBE and MCJE speedrunning. MCBE villages only generate
in certain locations, called
"[grids](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/13HScCcuMsga9hCMtYHMB3pQV-INp4V9VPE8PuQfz014/edit#gid=0)"
in a gingham pattern (only 1 village generates per grid as of 1.11
[village and pillage {1.14 java}]). Since usually the 3 closest
strongholds generate under villages, this vastly effects where
strongholds will be. 25% of villages on bedrock are abandoned as of
1.11. Since village grids on Bedrock are smaller than they are on Java,
villagers are more common.

### Mega Ravines

In addition to standard ravines, Bedrock also has ravines which extend
to y11 and have lava covering the entire bottom of them. This obviously
provides a free nether entry. From estimation, I would say the slight
majority of ravines are those you would also see on Java.

### Lava Pools

Lava pools are rarer, do not have any preferred biome such as the desert
on Java, and do not generate underground other than at Y11 on Bedrock. A
positive to Bedrock lava pools is that they are rarely only one block
deep and running out of lava is extremely rare, even if you accidentally
turn the entire surface into obsidian.

### Ocean Structures

Gamma 5.0 is allowed on Bedrock, but it is useless - as soon as you open
the game, it is automatically reverted to Gamma 1.0. This makes seeing
anything underwater very difficult on Bedrock. But, even if we could see
stuff in the ocean, it is almost always useless.

Shipwrecks only generate the treasure and food chest about one third of
the time each. The buried treasure map in a shipwreck will always point
to the buried treasure closest to 0,0 (1.16 bug).

Buried treasures generate 8,8 instead of 9,9 like Java. Since there is
no F3, mapless buried treasure isn't possible except with dolphins. This
method is slow and inconsistent.

"Surface" magma ravines do not contain lava. Instead, obsidian replaces
it even though no contact with water has ever happened. Caves and
underground magma ravines still contain lava, but these are much harder
to find.

Elder Guardians in ocean monuments instantly give you the mining fatigue
effect once coming within fifty blocks of the elder guardians. This
cannot be avoided and drinking milk only removes the effect for less
than a second before you receive it again. Render distance manipulation
isn't possible on Bedrock.

### Strongholds

On Bedrock, three, and only three, strongholds generate under villages.
These strongholds are **usually** the three closest strongholds;
however, if biomes do not permit plenty of villages to spawn close to
0,0, some of these strongholds (and rarely, all three) will spawn
farther out. Either way, there will ALWAYS be 3 total stronghold
villages.

Bedrock does not have stronghold rings and the strongholds that are
close to 0,0 (which are always the main strongholds used in speedruns)
are almost always dictated by the village grid.

Bedrock strongholds also only need to be about 450 blocks out from 0,0
to start generating; however, strongholds at this distance are very rare
and most don't start generating till at least 800 blocks (Euclidean
distance) out. On the vast majority of seeds, the closest stronghold is
under a village that is between 700 and 1900 blocks from 0,0.

Bedrock stronghold navigation is done similarly to Java, but going
deeper in every direction by a couple rooms. Due to no f3 screen,
preemptive navigation is not possible. Hidden rooms function the same as
Java. On rare occasions, Bedrock strongholds can have far over sixteen
room portal rooms, with the farthest known portal room documented being
thirty-two rooms deep. One out of seventeen strongholds does not
generate with a portal room. This is supposedly a feature and still
exists in modern updates.

Strats and Routes
-----------------

### F3

Due to the fact that Bedrock has no F3 screen, many advanced technically
strategies are not possible:

- Mapless buried treasure
- Piedar for structures
- Eray for bastions
- Divine travel
- Calculated travel using a calculator
- F3 + <insert letter> commands - hitboxes, chunk borders, render
  distance changing etc.
- Preemptive stronghold navigation

### Pausing and Timing

Opening the pause menu on Bedrock does not pause the game. Therefore,
you cannot change settings without wasting time. Bedrock is
unfortunately timed in RTA, so loading screens do count towards the
final time.

### Spawn relocation

MCBE only has four spawnable biomes - plains, forest, taiga, and jungle.
The game initially attempts to spawn the player at coordinates 44,4, but
if there is not a spawnable biome it relocates the player four blocks
positive X constantly until it finds a viable spawn biome (it may also
move the player up to a higher z [max of z32] if that lets the player
spawn in a spawnable biome closer to 0,0 than relocating on +x), this
allows the player to spawn near strongholds.

### Overworld Meta

Almost all Bedrock runs involve a village, which is then followed by an
entry through a lava pool, stronghold portal room, ruined portal, mega
ravine, etc.

### Wood Light

Using wood to light a portal is the most common method on Bedrock. The
RNG is much lower using this method than on Java and usually takes about
three seconds. To wood light on bedrock, the player just places 2 blocks
up on the front of the portal with lava on top of them (against the top
obsidian) and after the lava flows twice, it lights most of the time.

### Fortresses

When blaze bedding, frontside blaze bedding and topside (only one block
separation between the bed and the spawner) are most common. Blazes and
wither skeletons have different AI than java. Blazes on bedrock cannot
shoot from farther than sixteen blocks away, but their shots are
extremely accurate and hard to dodge. Wither skeletons are very glitchy
and can reach about the same distance as the player, resulting in the
player getting hit quite easily from them.

### Piglins and Bastions

Piglins have different AI and can only see gold on the same Y layer as
their head of feet. When a block considered valuable to a piglin is
broken (gold block, gold ore, gilded blackstone, chest, etc.) it causes
piglins holding gold to instantly trade and pick up more gold; this
mechanic is known as fast barter. Because of fast barter, most bastion
routes are faster, but are much different from Java. Bastion routes are
linked
[here](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLNOHqaRmLEqm1drGidD5NSCZGvAyB9wz-)
and piglin AI is linked
[here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2NrE-lmE5Sk).

### Educated Travel

Home Portal Educated Travel is much more commonly used than on Java. For
Educated Travel, the player returns to his original portal and throws an
eye in the overworld. He then sees what the approximate angle is and
using the village grid, he can figure out approximately where to place
down his second portal (note: this requires more than just knowledge to
do well; you also need a lot of experience).

### One Cycle

For the one cycle, the player has to activate quadruple damage to the
dragon by throwing a projectile at her neck, place lava to slow her down
as she leaves and explode 3 beds to kill her. All of this is done once
she is perched. A tutorial for killing the dragon will be linked
[here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4h8CfcQcbrE) (note that this
tutorial is a bit outdated and the most common projectile that players
use is an ender pearl).
